---
layout: post
title: When does Muon work? Model depth is a key factor
date: 2026-03-11
description: 
tags: [Physics-of-AI, Optimization]
categories: AI
---

**Author: Ziming Liu (刘子鸣)**

---

## Motivation

The **Muon optimizer** has recently shown great promise in LLM training. However, the **no-free-lunch theorem** suggests that there must exist conditions under which Muon either works well or fails (relative to Adam). The goal of this blog is to make a first attempt at understanding **when Muon works**.

---

## Problem setup

**Model**  
I use an MLP with either **linear activations** or **SiLU activations**. We sweep the depth of the network: 1, 2, 5, and 10.

**Dataset**  
The dataset is a **linear regression** task. Given a randomly sampled input $$x\in\mathbb{R}^{100}$$, its label is generated by a ground-truth matrix $$W_{\rm gt}\in\mathbb{R}^{100\times 100}$$ such that

$$y=W_{\rm gt}x$$

The loss is the **MSE loss** between the prediction and the label.

**Optimizers**  
We test both **Adam** and **Muon**. Learning rates are swept over  
0.0001, 0.0003, 0.001, 0.003, and 0.01.

---

## Results

I started with **depth = 1**. Despite extensive attempts (including tuning $$W_{\rm gt}$$), I could not find a setting where Muon outperforms Adam. This led me to hypothesize that Muon may work better in **harder optimization settings**, for example when the network is deeper. Interestingly, the experiments indeed support this hypothesis.

**Linear activation function**

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 100%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/optimization-5/linear.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

**SiLU activation function**

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 100%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/optimization-5/silu.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

---

## Why does depth matter?

One possible hypothesis is that **deeper networks tend to produce loss landscapes that resemble river valleys**, while Muon may be particularly effective at navigating such **river-valley-like landscapes**.

---
## Code

Google Colab notebook available [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/163Jq_aii2zmu9Msh_B3eMFgjZgBLLrVx?usp=sharing).


---


## Citation

If you find this article useful, please cite it as:

**BibTeX:**

```bibtex
@article{liu2026optimization-5,
  title={When does Muon work? Model depth is a key factor},
  author={Liu, Ziming},
  year={2026},
  month={March},
  url={https://KindXiaoming.github.io/blog/2026/optimization-5/}
}
```



