---
layout: post
title: A toy model of video generative models -- bottleneck dimension controls "classical"/"quantum" strategies
date: 2026-03-09
description: 
tags: [Physics-of-AI, Representation, Diffusion, Flow-matching, Autoencoder, Video-generative-model]
categories: AI
---

**Author: Ziming Liu (刘子鸣)**

---

## Motivation

I am interested in whether video generative models have truly learned “physics” (or at least *intuitive physics*) from videos. However, verifying this claim is difficult with natural videos, where the ground-truth “physics” is unknown. It is therefore more reasonable to start with **synthetic datasets**, where the underlying physics is fully controlled and known.

---

## Problem setup

I deliberately keep the algorithmic choices as simple as possible.

**Dataset**  
Each frame is a grayscale image containing a square. The center of the square follows a circular trajectory. The radius is randomly sampled, the starting angle is randomly sampled, and the rotation direction (clockwise or counter-clockwise) is also randomly sampled. The angular velocity is fixed at **45 degrees per frame**, and each video consists of **8 frames**.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 100%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/video-example.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

**Model**  
We adopt the **Stable Diffusion** framework. An autoencoder compresses each image into a latent vector $$z\in\mathbb{R}^{d_l}$$ (where $$d_l$$ is referred to as the embedding dimension below). Both the encoder and the decoder are CNNs.

A video is then compressed into latents. We flatten the latent vectors of individual frames into a single **video latent**. I use **flow matching** to generate the video latent.

Even with this simple setup, there are still many hyperparameters that could be tuned. In this blog, I focus specifically on the role of the **embedding dimension**.

---

## Small embed dim = "Classical"/"Physical" vs Large embed dim = "Quantum"/"Neural"

One might expect that an embedding dimension of **2** should suffice, since the true degrees of freedom of the square images are only two: the $$x$$ and $$y$$ coordinates. Indeed, we find that **embed dim = 2** works, and **embed dim = 100** also works (as expected). However, the two cases appear to use very different algorithms internally.

In the experiments below, we provide the **first frame** and generate the remaining frames.

As we will show, **embed dim = 2** behaves more like **classical mechanics**: there is always exactly one square (ignoring minor imperfections during learning), even at early inference steps. The motion happens directly in physical space.

In contrast, **embed dim = 100** behaves more like **quantum mechanics** or **place-cell representations in neuroscience**. In physics, position is represented explicitly by 2D coordinates. In the brain, however, position may be represented by the firing rates of many **place cells**. In this representation, the “one-square constraint” can be temporarily broken. We hypothesize that the neural code leverages this flexibility to represent **probability distributions** during intermediate sampling steps.

In particular, when **embed dim = 100** and **sampling step = 20 (out of 50)**, frame 1/2 appears to represent both possibilities simultaneously (the square in frame 0 moving either clockwise or counter-clockwise).

**Embed dim = 2**

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_2_step_0.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_2_step_20.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_2_step_50.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

**Embed dim = 100**

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_100_step_0.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_100_step_20.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/dim_100_step_50.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

---

## Representation geometry

One might expect that if we construct a **grid of images** (where each grid point corresponds to a square located at that position), then the latent space would form a corresponding **grid structure** (embedding dimension is set to 2). However, this does not occur trivially.

More experiments are needed, but I find that the latent geometry seems to depend on the **overlap between nearby images**. When I vary the range of square centers, I observe different geometric structures emerging in the latent space: range = 0.2 has nice grid structure; range = 0.4 has a warped grid structure; range = 0.8 has two sections and appear to be somewhat singular.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/bottleneck_0d8.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/bottleneck_0d4.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 70%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/toy-vgm/bottleneck_0d2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

---
## Code

Google Colab notebook available [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1W94ID00HqDTHPqTsCVWZ-dhOjxJgeALC?usp=sharing).


---


## Citation

If you find this article useful, please cite it as:

**BibTeX:**

```bibtex
@article{liu2026toy-vgm,
  title={A toy model of video generative models -- bottleneck dimension controls "classical"/"quantum" strategies},
  author={Liu, Ziming},
  year={2026},
  month={March},
  url={https://KindXiaoming.github.io/blog/2026/toy-vgm/}
}
```



