---
layout: post
title: MOE 1 -- Experssive power of MOEs through the lens of spectral bias and memorization capacity
date: 2026-03-09
description: 
tags: [Physics-of-AI, MLP, MOE, Memorization, Spectral-bias]
categories: AI
---

**Author: Ziming Liu (刘子鸣)**

---

## Motivation

Nowadays, MoE (Mixture-of-Experts) architectures are widely adopted in large-scale models. Although, in my understanding, the main motivation for using MoEs is **computational efficiency**, I am curious whether they also provide advantages in **expressive power**.  

The goal of this blog is to demonstrate potential expressivity advantages using **toy synthetic datasets**.

---

## Problem setup

**Model**  
Suppose there are $$K$$ experts, and each expert is a **2-layer MLP** with $$N$$ hidden neurons. The output of the MoE is $$\sum_i g_i {\rm MLP}_i(x)$$, where the gating weights are given by $$g = {\rm softmax}(W_g x)$$. I do not use **top-k selection**, since the goal of this blog is to understand **expressivity** rather than efficiency. For a fair comparison, I keep $$N\cdot K$$ fixed while varying $$K$$.

**Dataset 1: Regression**  
We regress a 2D oscillatory function: $$f(x,y) = {\rm sin}(fx) + {\rm sin}(fy)$$ where $$f=7$$ and $$x,y\in U[-1,1]$$.

**Dataset 2: Memorization**  
The memorization dataset is the same as in the previous blog [memory-2](/blog/2026/memory-2/).

---

## Results 1: Regression

For each row in the figure, we plot three quantities:

* **Training loss curves**
* **First-layer weights** (normalized to lie on a circle). Each point corresponds to the two weights connected to a hidden neuron.
* **Voronoi diagram:** within each region, one expert is dominant. On the decision boundaries, two (or more) experts have equal gating weights.

I set $$N\cdot K$$ to be 60 and find that $$K=10$$ achieves the best performance.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 100%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/moe-1/regression.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

The weight visualization is less informative than I initially expected, but the case $$K=2$$ appears to exhibit a **condensation phenomenon**.

---

## Results 2: Memorization

We fix $$N\cdot K = 60$$.

For the memorization task, we plot the **memorized bits as a function of training steps** (left plot) for each value of $$K$$. It appears that larger $$K$$ consistently memorizes more bits. Moreover, the results seem to follow a **scaling law** (right plot): $$C \sim K^{0.24}$$.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="mt-3 mt-md-0" style="width: 100%; margin: 0 auto;">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/blogs/moe-1/memorization.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

In a sense, the memorization task is effectively learning an arbitrarily high-frequency function -- this might be the reason why larger $$K$$ is always better. When the target function is not arbitrarily high-frequency (as in the regression case), $$K$$ has a sweet spot in the middle.



---
## Code

Google Colab notebook available [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/17GLkKNocCGkQbYeULL6xKKq-TdwLiKlT?usp=sharing).


---


## Citation

If you find this article useful, please cite it as:

**BibTeX:**

```bibtex
@article{liu2026moe-1,
  title={MOE 1 -- Experssive power of MOEs through the lens of spectral bias and memorization capacity},
  author={Liu, Ziming},
  year={2026},
  month={March},
  url={https://KindXiaoming.github.io/blog/2026/moe-1/}
}
```



